[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This is Book Tours,
and I'm Corinne Edwards.
I'd like you to meet one of
the most important messengers
in publishing today,
important because the authors
on this show are dedicated to
your personal growth, to make
you happier, healthier,
to be the best you can be,
Dr. Andrew Weil, author of
"Eating Well for Optimum
Health."
There are many books on diets
out there, and many of us
have tried them all.
What works?
On the low carb diets, even a
green pepper becomes an enemy.
I'm confused.
But Dr. Andrew Weil,
the renowned author
of "Eating Well
for Optimum Health"
is here to help us today.
Andrew, what about
all these new diets?
>> I think it's crazier out
there than I ever remember
in my lifetime.
People are really confused.
I think most of these diets
I would consider extreme.
They're asking us to make
drastic rearrangements of fat,
carbohydrate, and protein.
I don't think that's wise.
And certainly not wise as a
long-term eating strategy,
although, many of them will
work as short-term crash diets.
>> I sat next to a lady in
the beauty shop yesterday,
and I remember her
from maybe a year ago.
She has lost 100 pounds
on the Atkins diet.
>> Well, great, now it's a
problem she's got is how is she
going to transition off of
this onto a way of eating
that's going to work for
long-term health because I
don't think following an Atkins
diet is good for the long-term
health of your kidneys or liver.
So if she goes off it, she's
going to regain all the weight,
and she can't stay
on this long term.
So that's the dilemma.
>> She says she can.
>> Well, because eating
that much protein is really
unhealthy for your
liver and kidneys.
And also, people on this diet
are often very unconscious
about the kind and amount
of fat that they eat.
So again, it's
over the long term,
this is not a good way to
maintain physical health
or mental well-being.
>> All right, what about the
fact that they're saying now
that some people are actually
allergic to carbohydrates?
>> I don't think
that's the right term.
I think there is
carbohydrate sensitivity,
and maybe 25% to 30% of the
population is in that category.
If you're carbohydrate
sensitive,
I don't think that
means you never
eat carbohydrate or the
carbohydrate is the enemy.
I do think it means you
need to pay attention
to the differences in different
kinds of carbohydrates,
that, for example, that
pasta is better than bread
because it's digested more
slowly, that you can reduce
the impact of pasta even more
by cooking it really al dente so
that it's chewy and
firm, that there's
a big difference between dense,
dark, chewy, grainy peasant
bread and white, fluffy bread.
You know, there are
differences in carbohydrates.
>> So what happens like--
you talk about whole wheat
bread against white bread.
Well, first of all, you say
never put it in your mouth.
>> Well, the problem is that
most whole wheat bread is
indistinguishable from white
bread in terms of its impact
on blood sugar because, even
though the grains are whole,
they've been milled into
these very fine particles.
That's the main determinant
of how fast it's digested.
But there's a
difference, as I said,
the old-fashioned, peasant
bread in which was actually
cracked grains, it's course,
that has a much, much less
of an impact on blood
sugar and insulin levels
and even carbohydrate
sensitive people
can eat it in moderation.
>> What about what about the
fact that they're now saying,
on these diets, now let's
throw the zone-- in there.
>> Yeah, yeah, good.
>> You can throw
Pritikin in there?
What about-- they're
saying now, for example,
Pritikin says fruits and
vegetables, almost no protein,
and almost no carbs.
>> The Pritikin good diet is
one of these ultra low fat diets
along with Ornish.
And I think the
problem of those diets
is, first of all, is you
get fat so low, food really
becomes uninteresting.
And I think most of us aren't
going to stay on those diets
unless there's a very
strong medical motivation.
But another problem is
that these very low fat
diets worsen deficiency
of omega-3 fatty acids,
the ones in fish and nuts
and some soy products.
You've got to have
these, and most of us
are deficient in them.
And I think you're
in greater danger
on these very low fat diets.
One of the crazy ideas I hear
from the low carbohydrate diet
is that you shouldn't eat
carrots or beets because these
are supposed to have too much--
>> Green pepper.
>> Sugar in it--
or green pepper.
This is crazy.
In order to eat enough carrots
to disturb blood sugar,
you'd have to eat
probably 1 pound
and 1/2 at a single sitting.
>> A real rabbit.
>> Really.
Hard to tell people
not the carrots
is silly because carrots
are full of compounds
that protect us against
cancer, that are really
good for long-term health.
So I think that these writers
have pieces of the truth,
but then it's distorted.
>> All right, let's go to
some of the other theories.
This is a very
well-known nutritionist
I heard about who said, what the
secret of balancing your blood
sugar so that you don't
have this rush of insulin
is to not mix things.
Like, you should put protein
with vegetables and carbs--
and not eat carbs.
>> I have heard this.
I've read this theory.
I think this business
of food combining
is a very individual matter.
Some combinations don't
agree with some people.
I don't think there's
general rules.
Protein and carbohydrate
are naturally
mixed in beans and
grains, which have
sustained life in
a lot of cultures
throughout a lot of history.
I don't think it's any
mystery why Americans are fat.
Americans are fat because
they eat too much,
and they eat too much of
the wrong kinds of foods,
so they don't get
enough activity.
They eat too much in two ways.
They eat portions
that are too big,
and they eat too frequently.
And I think these trends have
increased in my lifetime.
When I was a kid, nobody
was eating Big Gulps
of soft drinks and
buckets of popcorn
in movie theaters and
oversized muffins.
People from other
cultures who come
to our restaurants, their eyes
bug out at the size of portions
here.
And they get right
into it because when
you put that quantity of
food in front of people,
they go for it.
But I think all this
has gotten worse.
And in terms of inactivity,
I think major factors here
are television, computers,
video games, which
have sucked more and
more young people
into sedentary lifestyles,
and automobiles, which I think
have really sabotaged walking.
So I think I don't
think you need a book
to figure out why we're fat.
And I also don't think you
need a book or a theory
to figure out what
to do about it.
You want to eat less, and you
want to increase activity.
And you also want to eat
the right kinds of foods.
I think that this new
information about carbohydrates
is very important because not
all carbohydrates are equal,
and some people are very
sensitive to the weight gaining
effects of refined
carbohydrates.
>> While I had you on this show
about a year and a half ago.
You're much slimmer now.
What did you do?
>> OK, first of all--
>> You weren't fat before.
>> My body type is--
I have this kind of body type.
I am never going to
be svelte and skinny.
I think it's
important for people
to realize that body type
is genetically determined.
We don't think we can
control our height,
and we don't have much more
power to control our body type.
And your body wants to
be at a certain weight.
I think we're made
crazy in this culture
by being bombarded with all
these messages from the fashion
and entertainment industries
about an ideal body type that's
an impossibility for most of us.
I work to keep myself in good
shape by being very active.
When I'm home, I either
walk every day, I swim, or I
bicycle, or some
combination of all of that,
and I get daily activity.
And I also watch what I eat.
I have found that, for
myself, that just cutting out
bread or cutting down on bread
has been a great strategy
for controlling my weight.
But it's worth remembering
that we could as easily have
been born into a
culture or a time
where skinny people were
thought to be sexually
unattractive and unhealthy.
>> Well, I can't stand
skinny men myself.
I like a man with a
little bit of heft to him.
But women particularly, Andrew.
>> I know.
I am aware.
But I think this
is very damaging
because most people can't
attain this kind of ideal that's
put out there.
I also think that, if
you're not morbidly obese--
and we all know morbid
obesity when we see it.
>> What is morbid obesity?
>> Greater than-- significantly
greater than 20% over
your, what your
body fat should be.
But you know we all know
people whose walking is
impaired by how big they are.
If you're not in that category,
and you are overweight,
I don't think that there's any
necessary consequence on health
or longevity if you keep
yourself fit and healthy,
meaning that you get adequate
exercise, and you eat well.
So I think I think that
the obsession with leanness
has even distorted our
medical information.
>> Do you think that men
really like skinny women?
Well, I can only
speak for myself.
I don't.
I don't like people
that look skeletal.
I also like some heft.
>> Well you don't--
so maybe, in a way,
we are trying--
we women, particularly,
are trying
to achieve a figure that is
not even attractive to who
we want to attract.
>> I think that
is very possible.
I think that the fashion
industry has probably
done a lot of women
a great disservice.
>> One of the consoling things
I read once is that Marilyn
Monroe wore a size 12.
>> Oh, right.
>> We are all trying to
get down to a size 6,
but Marilyn Monroe, the
sex goddess of all time--
>> That is great.
That is great.
>> Size 12.
>> Good, I like this.
Well, I think that
certainly one strategy
for dealing with all
of this is to learn
to like your body type.
I know that's a hard
thing to ask of people,
but liking your body the
way it is is the first step
toward changing it.
>> Did you also cut out-- you
said you cut out white bread
or cut out bread?
>> I reduced my
consumption of bread.
>> And what about sugar?
>> I think it depends what
you mean by sugar because when
a lot of people say they
eat sugar or eat sweets.
What they're talking about
are pastries, cakes--
>> All right, hold that
thought because this is a real
important point.
>> All right.
>> We're talking to Dr.
Andrew Weil here about one
of our favorite topics.
How do we get skinny?
He has written a book called
"Eating Well for Optimum
Health."
Stay with it.
You don't want to miss this.
We'll be right back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We have a big treat
for you today.
If you've just
joined us, we want
you to know that we are
talking to the Dr. Andrew
Weil who is the author of
"Eating Well for Optimum
Health."
When we closed the
last segment, Andrew,
we were talking about one of
our favorite subjects, sugar.
>> Actually, sugar itself has
an intermediate glycemic index.
It's not as bad as many
white flour products.
I think, when people
say they go for sweets,
often, they're going
for unhealthy foods.
They're going for pies,
cakes, pastries, donuts.
That stuff clearly is bad
and promotes weight gain.
But there's nothing wrong with
an occasional sweet itself.
Either in the form of good
fruit, maybe some fruits--
>> That doesn't count.
All right.
How about talk about chocolate.
>> Chocolate, OK,
now we're talking.
>> I think high-quality
dark chocolate is fine
in moderation.
This is a good treat.
First of all chocolate has
good antioxidant activity
similar to red
wine or green tea.
In high quality
chocolate, there's
a lot of actual cacoa present.
The fat in chocolate--
cacoa butter
has a neutral effect
on cholesterol
or even a slightly
beneficial effect.
And to me, this is a great
way to satisfy sweet cravings.
There's relatively-- actually
the percentage of sugar
is not that high.
I think that's a
perfectly OK sweet treat.
>> I remember the with
the Weight Watcher lady,
what's her name--
Jean--
>> Yes, yes, yes, right.
>> She used to say, there is
no such thing to a fatty as one
cookie.
Now, is there is such a thing
as one piece of chocolate?
>> I think there is.
I find this to be true
that I can break off
the square of a high
quality chocolate bar,
let it slowly
dissolve in my mouth
and really have it satisfying.
But you obviously have
a very fine character.
>> I think it's
possible to do that.
Similarly, if you're
out in a restaurant,
and you want a dessert, so
order a dessert for the table,
and have a bite of
it or a bite or two.
That's fine.
I think if you try
to deprive yourself,
you're setting yourself up
for binging on something
or craving it.
But actually, I really
am more concerned
about a lot of
the starchy things
we eat than the sugary things.
And a very simple tip
for people in restaurants
is to tell waiters not to bring
bread and butter until the meal
arrives if at all.
It is so easy to load up on
a vast amount of calories
of the worst kind of
starch even before you
get to eating your appetizer.
>> So what would be a
diet that would be--
let's reduce it down to
just a couple of things.
>> OK, great, well, the diet
that I recommend in this book I
think will help people.
First of all, I'd like to
shift the conversation some
away from a focus on weight
loss and focus on health.
I think it is much
better to look
at diet as a way of maintaining
and enhancing health than just
about weight loss.
You lost half of the
audience right there.
>> Sorry.
>> They want to lose weight.
>> OK, I would recommend going
on a diet have 50% to 60%
of calories as carbohydrate.
And if you are
carbohydrate sensitive,
you want to pay particular
attention to the glycemic index
and to stay away from
these high-glycemic index
foods, all the fluffy stuff.
>> So those are--
high glycemic would be bread.
>> It's most-- a
lot of potatoes.
>> What about sweet potatoes?
>> Sweet potatoes are OK.
Even waxing new potatoes
are OK in moderation--
it's the flowery,
big flowery potatoes.
>> The mashed potatoes.
>> You want to try to
stay away from white--
as many white flour
products as you
can and even whole wheat bread
that's essentially the same.
It's colored white bread.
I think you want to avoid
immoderate quantities of pasta.
You want to be
moderate about that.
In terms of rice,
Basmati rice is
better than sticky,
Chinese or Japanese rice.
>> That was interesting to me.
>> Interesting to know
about that, right.
But that's basic information.
I would also say that you
want to eat about 10% to 20%
of calories as protein.
And I'd recommend that, as
much as possible, of that
be fish and vegetable
protein because this
has healthful elements in it.
And soy products
are right in there.
And then I would say that
you can have 25% to 30%
of calories as fat.
And my recommendation is your
principle fat the olive oil
and that you make a great
effort to increase consumption
of omega-3 fatty acids by eating
fish like salmon or sardines
or herring or walnuts or
flax seeds or soy products,
which give you some of it.
>> But you kind of
limit, in your book,
the fish that we can eat
because you say so much of it is
contaminated.
>> Well, this is a problem.
And I think that you
know some fish are
more of a danger than others.
I would not eat swordfish.
It's too big, and it's
too carnivorous and likely
to concentrate toxins.
Sardines I think are OK.
They're a little
fish, and they're
a good source of omega-3s.
>> Why is a big fish--
>> The bigger the fish and
the more carnivorous it is,
the more it's at the
top of its food chain,
and the more it accumulates
all the toxins at every level
of this chain by which
smaller things, which--
bigger things eats more things.
>> And yet, you
say salmon is good.
That's a pretty big fish.
>> Salmon is a pretty big fish.
It's probably in the middle
range in terms of toxicity.
Most of the salmon
we get now is farmed.
It's possible to farm
salmon in clean water.
I have seen some organic farmed
salmon available in which drugs
are not used, like antibiotics.
The problem is that
much farmed salmon
has a lower omega-3
content than wild salmon,
but that could
easily be adjusted
by what you feed the salmon.
And it would be great
if people started
making high omega-3 farmed
salmon that was clean--
could easily happen.
There's a new egg on the market.
These are high omega-3
eggs that have--
>> Yeah I bought
some the other day.
>> They taste good,
and they're good.
So this is another good source--
>> --and mild.
>> Yeah this is another good
source of omega-3 fatty acids.
>> Now, I read your book.
Since I first met you,
I now put my olive oil
in the refrigerator.
>> Oh, right.
You know, it's OK to
leave a little bit out
except in the real hot time of
year because it's convenient.
But I think you don't want to
buy oils in big quantities.
Keep them in the refrigerator
because it retards oxidation,
which is much healthier.
And of course, you
want to be eating
plenty of fruits and vegetables
of good quality on any diet.
>> All right, what about--
let's talk about nitty-gritty
here, Haagen-Dazs ice cream?
How terrible is it?
>> Well, it is--
a little bit now and
then it's probably OK.
But in some ways,
maybe it's even better
than low-fat frozen yogurt.
Because the low-fat
frozen yogurt,
you've got more high glycemic
index carbohydrate calories
in it.
>> You say stay away from
everything that says no fat
or low fat.
>> I think-- we'll,
look what's happened.
As no fat and low fat foods have
become more and more prominent
in the American
marketplace, Americans
have steadily gotten fatter.
So something's wrong
with that picture.
And I think one of the
things is that people imagine
that you could eat these foods
with abandon, that they're
no-calorie foods.
And that certainly
is not the case.
And often, the low fat foods
have higher amounts of sugar
to make them taste better,
and that's probably
worse for people who are
carbohydrate sensitive.
>> So maybe we get more
satisfied with a food that has
a higher fat content.
>> I think so.
Fat is more satiating, and I
think that's one reason, again,
why the Atkins diet may work
for people because, when you're
eating high fat foods, you
have a sensation of fullness
and satisfaction quicker,
and you actually may end up
taking in fewer calories.
>> You also brought up the
point that it starts to get
so boring, boring.
>> Yeah, I said I think any
monotonous diet you will lose
weight on.
I said in the book
that I probably
could design an
all cheesecake diet
that you can have as much
cheesecake as you want,
but nothing but
cheesecake all day long.
>> Or the all ice cream diet--
>> OK, so you would lose
weight on that, I'm sure.
However, again, that's probably
not healthy for long term.
>> Let's talk about labels.
I know we're skipping
all over the place.
There's so much in this book
that people have to learn from.
>> People need to be good
shoppers and wary consumers.
And we're lucky
to live at a time
when food products have to state
their contents on the labels.
So you want to train yourself
to be a label detective.
One rule that I follow
is, if they can barely
fit all the words on the label,
put it back on the shelf.
If it's something you
would make at home,
think of what ingredients
you would use to make it.
And if there's too many
things there that you never
heard of that you
wouldn't use at home,
put it back on the shelf.
If the words, "partially
hydrogenated" anything appear,
put it back on the shelf.
Don't buy things with
artificial colors in them.
These are some simple rules.
Another one-- there are some
label deceptions out there.
One of the worst is
the serving size.
You can buy a bag of chips.
And I could easily eat half
of that in no time, maybe
the whole thing, and it gives
you the calories per serving,
and then you see that there's
12 servings in the bag.
That's very misleading.
>> That's two potato chips.
>> Yeah, very misleading,
so you've got to take that
into account.
>> I think that was one of the
most important tips you said
in your book.
Because a lot of people say I
can't read that little print
to look for the words
partially hydrogenated,
you just say, look
at how long it is.
>> Yeah, that's a good one.
>> And do that even
without your glasses.
>> Yes, exactly.
>> You don't have to read it.
If it's got a lot of
print, don't buy it.
>> Don't buy it.
>> The other tip that was kind
of interesting is you said,
don't bother going
down the aisles.
Shopping on the periphery
of the supermarket.
>> Good Strategy-- in general,
the foods that are around
the edge of the supermarket,
that's we're going to find
the produce, for example, the
good quality fish and meats.
And it's the
interior of the store
you can find all the
refined and processed foods.
I think that the
American diet has
gotten more and more
top heavy and highly
refined and processed foods.
I think this is a big factor
in the obesity problem
that we've got in this country.
And many of these refined
and processed foods
are unhealthy for
us in other ways.
I think that's one
of the things that
protects people in countries
like France and Italy.
Even though they're eating foods
that we consider to be rich,
they're eating smaller
quantities of them,
and they're not eating all--
>> Plus they're more
satisfying maybe.
>> I think so, absolutely.
And they're not
eating fast food--
they're going to learn to, but
they're not, at the moment,
eating fast food
or processed food.
Here's an interesting story.
I have known-- I wonder
if you've known this too.
I've had a number
of friends who've
gone for vacations in France
and Italy for say a week
or two who are
concerned about weight
and just decided they were going
to throw caution to the wind,
pay no attention.
I'm going to eat.
And they insist they got no more
activity than they do at home,
and they come back
to face the scales,
and, to their amazement,
they're the same
or even have lost
a pound or two,
and they can't
understand what happened.
I think what happened is
actually they have not
been eating as much.
And even though they
think they have,
the food it's been
so satisfying,
and you devote all
this attention to it.
It's not something
you eat on the run.
It's really a major part
of your day and focus,
and you're satisfied.
>> And French people,
I think, do not--
they go to the fresh
markets to buy vegetables.
They don't go and get
something off the shelf
and then throw a
can of onion rings
in it to mix it up and make--
they put some onion in it.
>> Right, but, however, it's
very sad to note how quickly
this is changing all over
the world as a result of us.
We are exporting American
fast food everywhere
very successful.
My editor has a home in
southern France near Provence.
And he tells me that an American
fast food restaurant opened
in this region, and it's now
the most popular restaurant
in the area.
>> Oh, that's too bad.
>> Sad.
>> I'm sorry to hear that.
Well, we've been having a
wonderful time here talking
to Dr. Andrew Weil,
who is one of the most
controversial doctors in the
world, about his new book,
"Eating Well for
Optimum Health."
And as I always tell
you around here,
we bring you the most important
new messengers in publishing
today on this show.
These are authors
who care that you.
Keep coming back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]